Good afternoon everyone. Sundar, Deis, James, you know, sitting with the three of you, it feels like I'm in it's AI Nirvana. It's the three gods of AI are here. It's fantastic.

And you know, you've come to India at a time when the AI fever has just taken over the entire country. And as you go into the India AI summit, you know, what is the one thing, one expectation that you have? I'll start with the lightning round first. So, Sund, I'll start with you.

Yeah, maybe I'll say look, it's a transformational moment. I'm a bit nostalgic reflecting on maybe a decade ago coming to India and seeing the digital India transition and and the similar excitement there and it's been phenomenal to actually see a decade of progress. So in some ways this feels like the beginning of a a decadel long uh shift with AI. So transformational transformational uh well I I've just come from Bangalore actually and uh giving a talk at the IISC and I was really impressed with the the grad students there the energy um we had a big lecture I think 700 students and um the amount of enthusiasm and energy for AI and um excitement about the opportunities that were bring was was really interesting to see.

So I think I can feel that uh with the all around the summit really and it's exciting to see that you're good at thinking exponential right now. Think 700 exponential. You're going to see like 50,000 people crazy about AI in one place. So that's what you're going to see.

James, uh I I think it's an extraordinary moment uh for India and for the global south to showcase a couple things. first that it's actually quite possible to drive adoption and lead and also it's quite possible to build and innovate in AI. I think all too often we think of these things as not happening in the global south. I think it's an incredible moment to showcase that.

Yeah. Oh, fantastic. Sundra, I'm going to start with you since my job is about trying to figure out the future. So, I'm going to ask you to futurecast a little bit about India.

when you think let's think five years from now right what will AI success look like for India um are we going to be the largest user base are we going to be builders are we going to be rule shapers and if I may add to that what is the one thing we have to do now to achieve that whatever the goal is that we set for ourselves that you that you think we should set for ourselves look I mean I I traveled to many countries around the world and I do think India is unique uh you know uniquely positioned in this moment. I think it has a chance to play a big role in in in all three uh all three I think of Google as a full stack company and I think India you know obviously is going to be a full stack player in AI. Uh I think what's important to be in a position to do that and I think that's what this AI summit is about. You have to make sure you're investing in all the foundational things you need in the research in knowledge in the institutions you have here.

The government playing a role in diffusing AI across the country and economy and making sure it's reaching people. That means you're adopting it in all the sectors and in a way that that the progress is touching the average person on a day-to-day basis. uh be it a farmer, be it a student, be it a doctor uh in the healthcare sectors etc. And I think I think the foundation is being laid and I I can see it.

You've seen the announcements this week in terms of infrastructure investments alone. So I think that puts India in a good position to get there but I would say the progress is about diffusing the technology and I think India can play a role in all three categories. So transforming the lives of the last woman in the food chain. That's what success should look like, right?

That's absolutely correct. Okay. Wonderful. Um Dennis, I'll come to you next.

um you know a big fan of the work you do and you know one of the fascinating things about AlphaFold it's not just what it does but how many researchers how many scientists it has enabled to actually go out there and you know discover things that we couldn't even think of discovering a few years earlier right that's what for me that's what's really fascinating so when you think about and there's so many problems you can solve but when you think about India If we have to make one or two strategic bets, right? Uh what should those be where we really go in with deep investments, commitment and say that this is some you know this is a place where we want to be a global leader healthcare, education, what would be the two things you would prioritize? Well, first of all, I mean, as as we're very proud of the impact that programs like AlphaFold have done and over three million researchers around the world make use of it now, actually over 200,000 in India and um you know almost every biologist researcher in the world and uh I think it's just the beginning of the impact that AI is going to have on the sciences and medicine and I feel like India can play a very leading role in that um adoption of AI to the sciences. Maybe what I would say uh uh for India but also many countries I also advise UK on this is to double down on the things you're already strong at and uh are important to the country.

Perhaps it's agriculture for example uh and then be the leaders in applying AI to that space that you're already worldleading in. So I think agriculture is something I've been discussing with some of the ministers today uh you know for example uh making crops resilient to climate change maybe using uh the use of things like alcohol to help with that and then perhaps the other place would be uh maybe like Bollywood and the creative industries u making use of the latest AI tools. actually James has just been maybe can speak to that too and and how would how would DeepMind partner with the government of India on on these kind of uh moonshot projects? Well, we're partnering in all sorts of ways all the things that Sundar just announced and um we're we're ready and able to partner in much deeper ways uh if the government wants um whether it's you know with Gemini our main foundation models our scientific tools like AlphaFold or our open source work like Gemma.

So I think there's a range of things that we can help uh uh the government of India with. James, I'm going to ask you about the elephant in the room that everyone wants to know which is jobs. Right now I was listening to uh some of the things you were saying at Davos and it was very interesting. You were talking about how with every technology shift, there are jobs that change that go away and then there are jobs that get created but they don't happen at the same time.

There's a lag. So two questions. One, how do governments deal with this lag, right? Especially a young demography like India.

And two, uh what do we have to do to ensure that we come out of this as a job creator? No, I I think it's it's probably one of the most important questions that I think countries, governments, and society is going to need to think through. And I think it's important to keep in mind that when you're thinking about the question of AI and jobs, it's actually worth thinking about specific tasks as opposed to whole jobs because most jobs are made up of a constituency of different tasks. And when you look at that, you suddenly realize that as you said, you may have some occupations that will decline, many that will grow and many more that will actually change.

And I think it's important to keep that in mind. So what happens is when you look at these questions sector by sector or occupation by occupation, you see a lot of transitions going on. But to the question of what should governments do to make sure that in fact they are growing jobs and enabling the change that happens. I think one is to focus on skilling.

One of the things that happens in all these transitions whether it's people who are transitioning out of jobs that are declining or jobs that are growing or jobs that are changing is that the skills required change. So investing in skills and literacy and so forth I think is foundationally important. The other thing that's important is also the continued kind of investments that countries and governments like India are doing in infrastructure and innovation because a lot of the jobs that will grow will come out of those investments in infrastructure as well as investments in innovation. When you grow businesses, you grow companies and you have innovation in the economy that's what leads to job growth.

So I think those investments in innovation both in the infrastructure and the innovation but also in the skills is what governments need to focus on. I I think what you said is so important that you cannot have sort of a macro view of jobs. You need to start understanding which tasks are going to get impacted. You need to start planning for that.

You need to start planning for which sector. So we really have some work to do to figure out where will we get hurt the most. what are the opportunities and then plan for it and I think that's an excellent advice. Absolutely.

Yeah. Um Shundar uh if I may come back to you. Um the other elephant in the room are we going to see an AI bubble or are we not right now a lot of CEOs when you look at it talk to enterprise CEOs they are worried about really scaling up investments uh because they're worried about are they going to be able to justify the cost uh what will the board say etc etc. help us understand based on your experience based on Alphabet's experience how should CEOs deal with this question and deal with this problem today you know we live in a a truly global world I thought if I left the US I could avoid this question right [laughter] now no but but look it shows look I think it's an extraordinary moment I think uh we are investing to meet that moment right I think I think in some of the context Dennis has spoken about this is the industrial revolution but 10 times faster and 10 times larger and if you go back and look at the railroad investments or the national highway system in the US I mean these are such leverage investments and you know you you drive so much growth and value on top of that I view this as a transformational moment like that as Google I think we are fortunate that you know we've been focused on this technology for over a decade and be it search, be it YouTube, uh be it cloud, beat emerging businesses like Whimo or Isomorphic Labs, I think they're all getting better and growing based on this one technology underneath.

So we can generate a a return there. Just as an example, cloud alone in the last year, the backlog has doubled year on year to $240 billion. So that shows the potential for return on the other side and so we are investing to meet that demand and uh you know that's what makes this an exciting uh moment. So I think I think the investment makes sense given the progress in the technology we are seeing and the opportunities we see on top of it.

Um Deus I have to ask you the third elephant in the room which is what on earth is AGI? because, you know, we keep hearing about it and um the more we hear about it, the more we feel like we're trying to build something that is going to control all of us. Um and then the question is why are we building it? Um so what is it?

Is it is it really the end goal to control? Is the end goal to augment prosperity? and help us understand your take on it and also how should India be thinking about AGI or if we need to prepare what should we be doing? Well, the first thing I'll say is uh the reason I've worked my whole career on AI is because I think it's could be the ultimate tool for accelerating scientific discovery and areas like medicine.

So things like Alphafold I hope will be the first of many advances showcasing that. um and then we can apply that to help us tackle many of the challenges facing society today from disease to climate to inequality. So I think AI on the upside the opportunity has an AGI and the limit has that potential. Um in terms of you know defining what AGI is I've always defined it have a high bar for AGI which is a system that exhibits all the cognitive capabilities that humans have.

Now, the reason that's important is the human reference point is because the brain is the only evidence we have, the only existence proof we have that general intelligence is possible. So, um it's kind of uh uh we won't really know we have a fully general system unless it's able to do a lot of things that um uh we sometimes take for granted. You know, things like creativity and um long-term planning and um better use of memory. And so today's systems, they're impressive, but they're not there yet in my opinion.

And uh I think we still got a way to go, at least another five, 10 years to go. But certainly in the next phase, the next decade or two decades, I see it as the sort of ultimate enhancement tool for us and SC, you know, human scientists, human experts, um but also the youth of today and this is what was exciting seeing that in uh in India here in this visit is um will have access to these incredible tools. So whatever that means you know building businesses creating art um I think uh they'll be sort of almost superpowered to do that with these um access to these tools that you can access from anywhere the most cutting edge tools in the world um um from anywhere including from India. So I think it's going to be very exciting moment but there are also risks too that we have to take into account.

You mentioned jobs earlier. Um but there's also technical risks of making sure these systems um stay in within their guard rails and they serve our purposes and what we want as humanity. Um and then furthermore the economic question of sharing the benefits that that's going to bring uh uh widely and equally to across the world. So these are all big challenges still to come.

Um but uh you know the potential is there if we do it in the right way. So you know just listening to what you said something something just struck me which is we all talk about how AI in the in the in the world of AI we're going to question the role of humans and we don't know but what you said sort of told me is that the role of humans is going to become even more important. I think am I right in I think for look for the next uh next couple of decades I think that's going to be the way we if you think about the AI systems today um they're kind of passive systems they're impressive but they're that the the human the using it puts in the energy puts in the question even in science um we have to supply the hypothesis um and what the right research question is and then these tools will help us get to those answers more quickly um so I think that's going to be the next phase of of the AI development story. James, I'll come back to you.

Um, Sund talked about his vision of success is when the last person in the value chain is empowered. Now in India, we have a very strong MSNme sector. The small micro businesses, they're really the the backbone of our economy, right? And they they always are left behind when it comes to technology adoption.

What I mean let I'll ask you the same question. What should AI success look like but withme lens? So what would your answer be? I I actually think this is one of the most exciting opportunities because I think for the longest time most in both developing developed quite frankly any economy have always not had the kind of capabilities and and powers that large companies have.

And I think this is probably the first technology that fundamentally changes that. You could argue the internet and mobile and all of that did some of that, but this does this even more. Think about the the kinds of superpowers that this technology gives to anme. Uh the imagine anme for it could be a trader, it could be a retailer, could be a small manufacturer doing kind of handcrafts and so forth.

But think about the ability to be able to harness technology without having to be a technologist. Think about the, you know, small proprietor who can actually describe the technological systems that they want their small business to use and almost vibe code or describe what they want and these systems build that. So I think the the possibility for these kind of superpower capabilities being available to small businesses I think is going to be extraordinary exciting and I think the potential for that particularly for countries like India and countries in the global south where the theme part of the economy is actually the biggest part of the economy and touches more pe more people more lives. Now one of the things that you know we're hoping we can contribute to this and we're partnering right now with the uh project vani for example with the Indian institute of science which is how do you make these technologies more available and usable in all the languages.

So we're now focusing a lot for example on the index languages and we and and how how do you do that? How do you make it possible to be able to just do uh speech translation directly without having to go to a keyboard and we're already working on that. So I think these are some of the possibilities formemes and I'm very very excited about that. Fantastic.

We have very little time left so I'm going to Sundra come to you. Um you know India has leaprogged past tech shifts. We went straight to mobile digital payments etc. Everyone keeps talking about the AI leaprog opportunity.

What does that mean to you? If you had to describe that what would that look like? Okay. Um, it's a great question.

I think that's what uh this opportunity represents. Look, I I mean it's a bit difficult to describe it, but I literally expect every sector in every context, every workflow to be transformed by it. So to me you know we're partnering with as in India as example as to how can we work for patients to kind of input their symptoms or give the information and the AI creates a report to help assist doctors. We are in early stages of projects like this but to me leaprog means in each of these sectors you radically transformed how the workflow happens.

I think how do students learn? How do your hospital systems work? uh how is government more efficient uh in a deep foundational way. I do think in areas like science I think one of the things uh Demis and his teams have been focused on is how do you accelerate scientific discovery at a fundamental level talking about a technology here which will allow you to create new things at some incredible incredibly fast trajectory.

So I think it's a bit uh tough to fully envision today other than we know it's going to happen uh in a pretty profound way. So but on a practical basis I expect on a day-to-day basis people's lives to be significantly enhanced with it across everything they touch. Yeah. Very last question to you Sundar.

We are known for our talent, young talent and then our young talent and we are very proud of people like you who go out and um you know do such fantastic work but what has to change in India so that the next sundar or sundar 2.0 stays here and builds the world's most magical AI company in India. Look, I think uh I mean it's already changed you know when I look at India's been producing extraordinary companies right you know when you look at companies like flip flip card oo etc I mean these these are all companies homegrown here uh and and and they're doing really really well the developer energy I find in India every time I travel you were in Bangaluru recently and you know it's it's bar none you know second to none the entrepreneurship ecosystem here is thriving uh you know even uh recently the work Serbam has done uh developing local AI models. So I think what you're talking about is actually happening and uh you know I I just don't see any impediments to that and I think India is very very well positioned. Well on that note thank you very much to all three of you and if I could please request Priti and Sanjay Gupta U president Google APAD to please join us.

Heat. Heat.
